README.md, before:

# IR Gateway
 The gateway serves as the primary point of communication with various databases, but each database has its own unique conventions and structures.

We will utilize the [wrapper design pattern](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adapter_pattern) to enable the use of a single, consistent interface to access several types of databases while encapsulating and abstracting away the complex interaction with each database. This makes switching between interfaces simple and eliminates the need to focus on the specific of each database.

Every data entry through the gateway is termed a **document**. Collectively, these documents are known as a **collection**. This is the convention we follow for our gateway and the wrapper with change the information to map to the respective items in the database. The relationship is demonstrated below:

```mermaid
graph LR;
    subgraph B[Collection]
    A[Documents]
    end
    subgraph I[Class]
    J[Objects]
    end
    subgraph K[Index]
    L[Documents]
    end
    C[VectorManager]
    D[DocManager]
    G[Weaviate]
    H[ElasticSearch]
    A-->C-->J-->G
    A-->D-->L-->H
    subgraph Wrapper
    C
    D
    end
```

## Key Terminologies:
|    **Term**    	| **ElasticSearch<br>Equivalent** 	| **Weaviate<br>Equivalent** 	|
|:--------------:	|:-------------------------------:	|:--------------------------:	|
| **Collection** 	|              Index              	|            Class           	|
|  **Document**  	|             Document            	|           Object           	|
|  **Schema**     	|              Mapping              |           Schema           	|


# Supported Frameworks
The following framework has their wrapper written for. Subsequent frameworks may refer to the existing wrapper. 
### Document Database:
- Elasticsearch
### Vector Database:
- Weaviate

# Setup
Setting up ElastDocker
```
git submodule init
git submodule update
cd doc_db/elastdocker
make setup
sysctl -w vm.max_map_count=262144
make elk
```

[//]: <> (TODO: Find the exec command)
Start IR Gateway
```
cd build
docker-compose up
docker exec -it ir_template_gateway_1 /bin/bash
```

# Usage
1) Configure all endpoints inside `build/.env`

[//]: <> (TODO: Refer to example.py)

2) Within your python script, import the wrappers
    ```
    from utils.ESManager import DocManager
    from utils.WeaviateManager import VectorManager

    DocMgr = DocManager()
    VecMgr = VectorManager()
    ```

3) Create a schema for the collection. Below are the following supported data type:
    - `int`
    - `float`
    - `double`
    - `str`
    - `bool`
    - `datetime`
    - `list[int]`
    - `list[str]`
    - `list[float]`
    - `list[double]`
    - `torch.tensor`
    - `numpy.ndarray`

    Note:
    - Weaviate ignores `torch.tensor` and `numpy.ndarray` fields because there will be a dedicated parameter for uploading vector
    - Weaviate **DOES NOT** support nested mapping
    - It is required for Weaviate schema to contain `doc_id` field, which is used for alignment of id across multiple frameworks. The baseline id shall be the one from ElasticSearch. 

    Some example of a schema is as shown:
    - Standard schema
    ```
    user_schema = {
        "name":"str",
        "id_no":"str",
        "age":"int",
        "school":"str",
        "grades":"float"
    }
    ```
    - Nested schema (Only supported in ElasticSearch)
    ```
    user_schema = {
        "name": "str",
        "age": "int",
        "education": {
            "university": {
            "school": "str",
            "grades": "float"
            }
        },
        "vector":"torch.tensor"
    }
    ```

4) Using the above schema, create a collection. The schema is compatible across all wrapped frameworks. 
    ```
    DocStore = DocMgr.create_collection(collection_name="personnel", schema=user_schema)
    VecStore = VecMgr.create_collection(collection_name="personnel", schema=user_schema)
    ```

# Functions

### Collections
- ```create_collection(collection_name: str, schema: dict)```
    - Creates a collection with the collection name and the schema.
    - **Parameters**:
        - **collection_name**: Name of the collection (automatically capitalise first letter as [Weaviate class convention](https://weaviate.io/developers/weaviate/current/more-resources/glossary.html). )
        - **schema**: A dictionary consisting of all the fields (Note: Schema of Weaviate requires `doc_id` field)
- ```delete_collection(collection_name: str)```
    - Deletes the indicated collection
    - **Parameters**:
        - **collection_name**: Name of the collection

### Documents
[//]: <> (TODO: Align and fix create_document for weaviate)

- ```create_document(collection_name: str, documents: List[Dict], id_field: str=None)``` (ElasticSearch)
<br> ```create_document(collection_name: str, documents: dict, embedding: torch.Tensor)``` (Weaviate)
    - Creates document within the collection. </br>
    - **Parameters**:
        - **collection_name**: Name of the collection
        - **documents**: Dictionary containing all the fields and its value for the document to be created
        - **id_field** (ElasticSearch): Specify the field from the documents to use as the internal id value. If no field is indicated, then ElasticSearch's generated id will be used instead. 
        - **embedding** (Weaviate): Vector associated with the document to be created

- ```delete_document(collection_name: str, doc_id: str)```
    - Deletes the specific document within collection by its id.
    - **Parameters**:
        - **collection_name**: Name of the collection
        - **doc_id**: id of document to be deleted

- ```read_document(collection_name: str, doc_id: str)```
    - Look up a specific document by its doc_id
    - **Parameters**:
        - **collection_name**: Name of the collection
        - **doc_id**: id of document of interest

- ```update_document(collection_name: str, doc_id:str, document: dict)```
    - Update a specific document by its doc_id
    - **Parameters**:
        - **collection_name**: Name of the collection
        - **doc_id**: id of document to be updated
        - **document**: Dictionary containing the fields and its value for the document to be updated. Only fields found in the dictionary will be updated. 




# Weaviate Wrapper -> `VectorManager`

You can import the `VectorManager` from `WeaviateManager`

Below is a quick overview of the attribute and methods of the class. All public methods i.e. those methods that do not start with `_` will return a python dictionary.

```mermaid
classDiagram
    class VectorManager{
        +dict TYPE_MAP
        +__init__()
        +_traverse_map(schema:dict)
        +_id2uuid(collection_name:dict, id_no:str)
        +_exists(collection_name: str, id_no: str)
        +create_collection(collection_name: str, schema: dict)
        +create_document(collection_name: str, properties: dict, embedding: torch.Tensor)
        +read_document(collection_name: str, id_no: str)
        +get_top_k(collection_name: str, target_embedding: Union[list, numpy.ndarray, torch.Tensor], top_k: int = 1)
        +update_document(collection_name: str, document: dict)
        +delete_document(self, collection_name: str, id_no: str)
        +delete_collection(self, collection_name: str)
    }
```

#### Usage

In the documentation, it is assumed that you have imported and you assign `client = VectorManager()`

> To create collection `client.create_collection(collection_name: str, user_schema: dict) -> dict`
```python
user_schema = {
    "id_no":"str",
    "age":"int",
}
client.create_collection(collection_name='Faces', schema=user_schema)
"""
{'response': 200}
"""
```

The wrapper will transform the above to 
```python
[
    {
        'name': 'id_no',
        'dataType': ["text"]
    },{
        'name': 'age',
        'dataType': ["int"],
    }
]
```

The entire mapping relationship is done with a dictionary as shown:
```python
TYPE_MAP = {
    #Python type: Weaviate data type 
    "int":["int"],
    "float":["number"],
    "double":["number"],
    "str": ["text"],
    "bool": ["boolean"],
    "datetime": ["date"],
    "list[int]":["int[]"],
    "list[str]":["text[]"],
    "list[float]": ["number[]"],
    "list[double]": ["number[]"],
}
```

> To create a document `create_document(self, collection_name: str, properties: dict, embedding: torch.Tensor) -> dict`

The properties cannot contradict the data type in the schema, but it could have new fields

```python
data_obj = {
    "id_no": "1",
    "age": 2
}
face_emb = torch.Tensor([0.5766745, 0.9341823, 0.7021697, 0.54776406, 0.013553977])
client.create_document(collection_name = 'Faces', properties = data_obj, embedding = face_emb)
"""
{'response': 200}
"""
```
> To read a specific document `read_document(self, collection_name: str, id_no: str) -> dict`

```python
client.read_document(collection_name='Faces', id_no = "1")
"""
{
    'response': {
        'class': 'Faces',
        'creationTimeUnix': 1671087077726,
        'id': '258953ae-4aad-43dc-aa9d-5f74bf38dfc4',
        'lastUpdateTimeUnix': 1671087077726,
        'properties': {'age': 1, 'id_no': '1'},
        'vector': [0.14229017, 0.43621045, 0.3271194, 0.9458164, 0.36649644],
        'vectorWeights': None
    }
}
"""
```
> To get similar document(s) base on a vector of embedding `get_top_k(self, collection_name: str, target_embedding: Union[list, numpy.ndarray, torch.Tensor], top_k: int = 1) -> dict`

```python
embedding = torch.Tensor([0.5766745, 0.9341823, 0.7021697, 0.54776406, 0.013553977])
client.get_top_k(collection_name='Faces', target_embedding=embedding, top_k=3)

"""
{
    'response': [{
        'response': {'class': 'Faces',
        'creationTimeUnix': 1671087077765,
        'id': '156443f7-df34-479e-8274-59833a1655ef',
        'lastUpdateTimeUnix': 1671087077765,
        'properties': {'id_no': '11', 'new': '2'},
        'vector': [0.5766745, 0.9341823, 0.7021697, 0.54776406, 0.013553977],
        'vectorWeights': None},
        'certainty': 0.9999999403953552
    },{
        'response': {'class': 'Faces',
        'creationTimeUnix': 1671087077751,
        'id': 'e999d2c4-22cb-420b-b114-52ecaf97f7e5',
        'lastUpdateTimeUnix': 1671087077751,
        'properties': {'age': 8, 'id_no': '8'},
        'vector': [0.3250035, 0.38524753, 0.38620043, 0.4955626, 0.06325245],
        'vectorWeights': None},
        'certainty': 0.97750523686409
    },{
        'response': {'class': 'Faces',
        'creationTimeUnix': 1671087077754,
        'id': 'fba70226-d09a-4403-ad9d-d8cb00058a2a',
        'lastUpdateTimeUnix': 1671087077754,
        'properties': {'age': 9, 'id_no': '9'},
        'vector': [0.44360954, 0.9544769, 0.73395604, 0.38870186, 0.5922022],
        'vectorWeights': None},
        'certainty': 0.9545671939849854
    }]
}
"""

```

> To update a document `update_document(self, collection_name: str, document: dict) -> dict`

```python
update = {
    'id_no': '1',
    'vector': torch.rand(1, 5),
    'age': 1
}
client.update_document(collection_name='Faces', document = update)
"""
{'response': 200}
"""
```

The update dictionary can have lesser field but it must at least have `id_no`

> To delete a docment `delete_document(self, collection_name: str, id_no: str) -> dict`

```python
client.delete_document(collection_name, "1")
"""
{'response': 200}
"""
```

> To delete a collection `delete_collection(self, collection_name: str) -> dict`

```python
client.delete_collection(collection_name='Faces')
"""
{'response': 200}
"""
```

Commit message:

allow for ES to create doc with a single dict as well

README.md, after:

# IR Gateway
 The gateway serves as the primary point of communication with various databases, but each database has its own unique conventions and structures.

We will utilize the [wrapper design pattern](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adapter_pattern) to enable the use of a single, consistent interface to access several types of databases while encapsulating and abstracting away the complex interaction with each database. This makes switching between interfaces simple and eliminates the need to focus on the specific of each database.

Every data entry through the gateway is termed a **document**. Collectively, these documents are known as a **collection**. This is the convention we follow for our gateway and the wrapper with change the information to map to the respective items in the database. The relationship is demonstrated below:

```mermaid
graph LR;
    subgraph B[Collection]
    A[Documents]
    end
    subgraph I[Class]
    J[Objects]
    end
    subgraph K[Index]
    L[Documents]
    end
    C[VectorManager]
    D[DocManager]
    G[Weaviate]
    H[ElasticSearch]
    A-->C-->J-->G
    A-->D-->L-->H
    subgraph Wrapper
    C
    D
    end
```

## Key Terminologies:
|    **Term**    	| **ElasticSearch<br>Equivalent** 	| **Weaviate<br>Equivalent** 	|
|:--------------:	|:-------------------------------:	|:--------------------------:	|
| **Collection** 	|              Index              	|            Class           	|
|  **Document**  	|             Document            	|           Object           	|
|  **Schema**     	|              Mapping              |           Schema           	|
|  **doc_id**     	|              _id                  |            uuid           	|

## Full Glossary Reference:
- [ElasticSearch](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elastic-stack-glossary/current/terms.html)
- [Weaviate](https://weaviate.io/developers/weaviate/current/more-resources/glossary.html)




# Supported Frameworks
The following framework has their wrapper written for. Subsequent frameworks may refer to the existing wrapper. 
### Document Database:
- Elasticsearch
### Vector Database:
- Weaviate

# Setup
Setting up ElastDocker
```
git submodule init
git submodule update
cd doc_db/elastdocker
make setup
sysctl -w vm.max_map_count=262144
make elk
```

[//]: <> (TODO: Find the exec command)
Start IR Gateway
```
cd build
docker-compose up
docker exec -it ir_template_gateway_1 /bin/bash
```

# Usage
1) Configure all endpoints inside `build/.env`

[//]: <> (TODO: Refer to example.py)

2) Within your python script, import the wrappers
    ```
    from utils.ESManager import DocManager
    from utils.WeaviateManager import VectorManager

    DocMgr = DocManager()
    VecMgr = VectorManager()
    ```

3) Create a schema for the collection. Below are the following supported data type:
    - `int`
    - `float`
    - `double`
    - `str`
    - `bool`
    - `datetime`
    - `list[int]`
    - `list[str]`
    - `list[float]`
    - `list[double]`
    - `torch.tensor`
    - `numpy.ndarray`

    Note:
    - Weaviate ignores `torch.tensor` and `numpy.ndarray` fields because there will be a dedicated parameter for uploading vector.
    - Weaviate **DOES NOT** support nested schema.
    - It is required for Weaviate schema to contain `doc_id` field, which is used for alignment of id across multiple frameworks. The baseline id shall be the one from ElasticSearch. 

    Some example of a schema is as shown:
    - Standard schema
    ```
    user_schema = {
        "name":"str",
        "doc_id":"str",
        "age":"int",
        "school":"str",
        "grades":"float"
    }
    ```
    - Nested schema (Only supported in ElasticSearch)
    ```
    user_schema = {
        "name": "str",
        "age": "int",
        "education": {
            "university": {
            "school": "str",
            "grades": "float"
            }
        },
        "vector":"torch.tensor"
    }
    ```

4) Using the above schema, create a collection. The schema is compatible across all wrapped frameworks. 
    ```
    DocStore = DocMgr.create_collection(collection_name="personnel", schema=user_schema)
    VecStore = VecMgr.create_collection(collection_name="personnel", schema=user_schema)
    ```

# Functions

### Collections
- ```create_collection(collection_name: str, schema: dict)```
    - Creates a collection with the collection name and the schema.
    - **Parameters**:
        - **collection_name**: Name of the collection
        - **schema**: A dictionary consisting of all the fields (Note: Schema of Weaviate requires `doc_id` field)
- ```delete_collection(collection_name: str)```
    - Deletes the indicated collection
    - **Parameters**:
        - **collection_name**: Name of the collection

### Documents
[//]: <> (TODO: Align and fix create_document for weaviate)

- ```create_document(collection_name: str, documents: dict, id_field: str=None)``` (ElasticSearch)
<br> ```create_document(collection_name: str, documents: dict, embedding: torch.Tensor)``` (Weaviate)
    - Creates document within the collection. </br>
    - **Parameters**:
        - **collection_name**: Name of the collection
        - **documents**: Dictionary containing all the fields and its value for the document to be created (ElasticSearch supports a list of dictionary (i.e. List[dict]) as well. For bulk uploading, consolidate documents in a list before calling this function)
        - **id_field** (ElasticSearch): Specify the field from the documents to use as the internal id value. If no field is indicated, then ElasticSearch's generated id will be used instead. 
        - **embedding** (Weaviate): Vector associated with the document to be created

- ```delete_document(collection_name: str, doc_id: str)```
    - Deletes the specific document within collection by its id.
    - **Parameters**:
        - **collection_name**: Name of the collection
        - **doc_id**: id of document to be deleted

- ```read_document(collection_name: str, doc_id: str)```
    - Look up a specific document by its doc_id
    - **Parameters**:
        - **collection_name**: Name of the collection
        - **doc_id**: id of document of interest

- ```update_document(collection_name: str, doc_id:str, document: dict)```
    - Update a specific document by its doc_id
    - **Parameters**:
        - **collection_name**: Name of the collection
        - **doc_id**: id of document to be updated
        - **document**: Dictionary containing the fields and its value for the document to be updated. Only fields found in the dictionary will be updated. 




# Weaviate Wrapper -> `VectorManager`

You can import the `VectorManager` from `WeaviateManager`

Below is a quick overview of the attribute and methods of the class. All public methods i.e. those methods that do not start with `_` will return a python dictionary.

```mermaid
classDiagram
    class VectorManager{
        +dict TYPE_MAP
        +__init__()
        +_traverse_map(schema:dict)
        +_id2uuid(collection_name:dict, id_no:str)
        +_exists(collection_name: str, id_no: str)
        +create_collection(collection_name: str, schema: dict)
        +create_document(collection_name: str, properties: dict, embedding: torch.Tensor)
        +read_document(collection_name: str, id_no: str)
        +get_top_k(collection_name: str, target_embedding: Union[list, numpy.ndarray, torch.Tensor], top_k: int = 1)
        +update_document(collection_name: str, document: dict)
        +delete_document(self, collection_name: str, id_no: str)
        +delete_collection(self, collection_name: str)
    }
```

#### Usage

In the documentation, it is assumed that you have imported and you assign `client = VectorManager()`

> To create collection `client.create_collection(collection_name: str, user_schema: dict) -> dict`
```python
user_schema = {
    "id_no":"str",
    "age":"int",
}
client.create_collection(collection_name='Faces', schema=user_schema)
"""
{'response': 200}
"""
```

The wrapper will transform the above to 
```python
[
    {
        'name': 'id_no',
        'dataType': ["text"]
    },{
        'name': 'age',
        'dataType': ["int"],
    }
]
```

The entire mapping relationship is done with a dictionary as shown:
```python
TYPE_MAP = {
    #Python type: Weaviate data type 
    "int":["int"],
    "float":["number"],
    "double":["number"],
    "str": ["text"],
    "bool": ["boolean"],
    "datetime": ["date"],
    "list[int]":["int[]"],
    "list[str]":["text[]"],
    "list[float]": ["number[]"],
    "list[double]": ["number[]"],
}
```

> To create a document `create_document(self, collection_name: str, properties: dict, embedding: torch.Tensor) -> dict`

The properties cannot contradict the data type in the schema, but it could have new fields

```python
data_obj = {
    "id_no": "1",
    "age": 2
}
face_emb = torch.Tensor([0.5766745, 0.9341823, 0.7021697, 0.54776406, 0.013553977])
client.create_document(collection_name = 'Faces', properties = data_obj, embedding = face_emb)
"""
{'response': 200}
"""
```
> To read a specific document `read_document(self, collection_name: str, id_no: str) -> dict`

```python
client.read_document(collection_name='Faces', id_no = "1")
"""
{
    'response': {
        'class': 'Faces',
        'creationTimeUnix': 1671087077726,
        'id': '258953ae-4aad-43dc-aa9d-5f74bf38dfc4',
        'lastUpdateTimeUnix': 1671087077726,
        'properties': {'age': 1, 'id_no': '1'},
        'vector': [0.14229017, 0.43621045, 0.3271194, 0.9458164, 0.36649644],
        'vectorWeights': None
    }
}
"""
```
> To get similar document(s) base on a vector of embedding `get_top_k(self, collection_name: str, target_embedding: Union[list, numpy.ndarray, torch.Tensor], top_k: int = 1) -> dict`

```python
embedding = torch.Tensor([0.5766745, 0.9341823, 0.7021697, 0.54776406, 0.013553977])
client.get_top_k(collection_name='Faces', target_embedding=embedding, top_k=3)

"""
{
    'response': [{
        'response': {'class': 'Faces',
        'creationTimeUnix': 1671087077765,
        'id': '156443f7-df34-479e-8274-59833a1655ef',
        'lastUpdateTimeUnix': 1671087077765,
        'properties': {'id_no': '11', 'new': '2'},
        'vector': [0.5766745, 0.9341823, 0.7021697, 0.54776406, 0.013553977],
        'vectorWeights': None},
        'certainty': 0.9999999403953552
    },{
        'response': {'class': 'Faces',
        'creationTimeUnix': 1671087077751,
        'id': 'e999d2c4-22cb-420b-b114-52ecaf97f7e5',
        'lastUpdateTimeUnix': 1671087077751,
        'properties': {'age': 8, 'id_no': '8'},
        'vector': [0.3250035, 0.38524753, 0.38620043, 0.4955626, 0.06325245],
        'vectorWeights': None},
        'certainty': 0.97750523686409
    },{
        'response': {'class': 'Faces',
        'creationTimeUnix': 1671087077754,
        'id': 'fba70226-d09a-4403-ad9d-d8cb00058a2a',
        'lastUpdateTimeUnix': 1671087077754,
        'properties': {'age': 9, 'id_no': '9'},
        'vector': [0.44360954, 0.9544769, 0.73395604, 0.38870186, 0.5922022],
        'vectorWeights': None},
        'certainty': 0.9545671939849854
    }]
}
"""

```

> To update a document `update_document(self, collection_name: str, document: dict) -> dict`

```python
update = {
    'id_no': '1',
    'vector': torch.rand(1, 5),
    'age': 1
}
client.update_document(collection_name='Faces', document = update)
"""
{'response': 200}
"""
```

The update dictionary can have lesser field but it must at least have `id_no`

> To delete a docment `delete_document(self, collection_name: str, id_no: str) -> dict`

```python
client.delete_document(collection_name, "1")
"""
{'response': 200}
"""
```

> To delete a collection `delete_collection(self, collection_name: str) -> dict`

```python
client.delete_collection(collection_name='Faces')
"""
{'response': 200}
"""
```
